So we have an idea of what the browser does with our Javascript code, how it technically is able to execute
that, how it compiles it
but if we take a closer look, if we zoom in into our code execution, how exactly does that work?
I don't mean the technical aspects regarding the code getting compiled but how the different steps in
our code, how the logic there is executed.
So let's look inside the Javascript engine,
the thing that executes our code and there, it's in the end all about managing memory and managing execution
steps
you could say and for this, we have two important concepts -
the heap and the stack. Now what are these concepts?
What's the idea?
The heap is our long term memory if you will,
it's all about memory allocation.
It stores data in our system memory and with it,
I mean the browser does that, the browser manages does heap thing, the browser taps into our system memory
and of course our operating system has a say in that as well,
it allocates memory to the browser application, so that the bigger picture
but if we zoom into the browser and then into the Javascript engine, in the end the browser does this
memory allocation in that thing which is called a heap.
So there data gets stored with which we work in our program
and important, long term data and then there is this stack thing.
Now that stack thing is in the end important for the execution of our code.
Of course the data is also important for that
but the stack is kind of the short term memory if you will.
It manages our program flow and mainly that means that the stack keeps control over which function is
currently executing
and when we execute a new function that this function is not executing and if a function returns, to
which function it returns that data. Now this becomes much clearer
if we simply have a look at an example and for this, attached again you find a very basic starting project
with an HTML file that's basically empty,
all it has is a script import and then we have this script.
So there are no real elements on the screen, there are no styles, it renders this empty page because now
we'll just have a look at some of the behind the scenes things where we can use the developer tools,
for example the console to get a feeling for what's happening.
So now here, let's write a basic program to get an understanding of what's happening. In this basic program
here, I want to have a function which I'll name greet and in this function,
I want to say
hello and I don't just want to say hello,
I also want to get the name of a user, so I'll have my userName constant and that value should be fetched
by another function.
So here, I'll add another function which I'll call get name and in this get name function, I have returned
a result of us prompting the user for the name.
So your name in this prompt here opens this dialog where we have to enter something, then prompt returns
that value and then I return the value returned by prompt to whoever called get name which in my
case will be greet.
So here I call get name,
so whatever we enter into this prompt will in the end end up in userName and then I output this here
in the console. Now last but not least, I just call greet down there,
otherwise these functions would only be registered but never executed,
right,
that's what you already learned.
This defines functions, Javascript then registers them,
you could say it stores them in the heap because these functions have have a long life
typically, they live as long as you do something in your application
and here we then call such a function.
OK
so with that if we save this and we reload this page, I get prompted here, I can enter Max and if I do so,
I print Hello Max here.
Now how does this relate to our stack heap thing here?
As mentioned, the functions themselves are basically stored in the heap, so that's where the browser stores
these functions and the code it should execute when these functions are executed
you could say and now when our script runs, the stack is getting active or to be precise, the browser in
the end pushes stuff into our stack and remember the stack is basically our short term memory, heap is
the long term memory.
Now in the stack, it all starts with some anonymous code execution which basically is the script file
itself, it doesn't have a name,
of course the file has a name but it's like in a big gigantic function to which you didn't assign a
name.
So the code directly in the file is in a function without a name you could say and therefore, we have
this anonymous execution in our stack,
so that's the overall script which is getting executed.
Of course that execution of our script only happens after Javascript evaluated the entire script
and for example saw all the function definitions,
that's what I already explained earlier in the course.
So the script execution started, we're executing the entire script and that basically means that this
greet line is getting executed,
so we call the greet function, therefore Javascript moves this greet function execution onto the stack. So the
stack is in the end a data structure, a short living data structure you could say, where your function executions
are stored
so to say, so where the browser or the Javascript engine keeps track of what's currently happening and
the stack is simply populated by pushing new function calls or new short living data on top of it
and popping it off when it's not required anymore.
So we started with the overall script execution, this anonymous function and in there, we call the greet
function hence this is pushed onto the stack and is now the topmost item in the stack
and the topmost item in the stack is always the thing which is currently happening
you could say. Now if we have a look at the greet function, what happens there is that we create a variable
and the variable is created by calling yet another function, the get name function.
So now the Javascript engine pushes this get name function execution onto the stack, therefore it now
knows this is the currently running function,
it was started by the greet function which in turn was started by this anonymous function,
so by our overall script. This is how Javascript or the Javascript engine can also keep track of the
relations of these function calls,
so which function called what.
So get name is running,
now what happens next? In get name,
we return the value of prompt.
Now technically, we therefore also call the prompt function which of course is not a function written
by us but a function provided by the browser which we can access through Javascript but still this is a
function call and therefore this also gets pushed on top of the stack and it would continue like this,
the more functions you call, the more it gets pushed onto the stack. Now what happens next?
Prompt opens that dialog
and once we entered something there and we clicked OK or also when we click cancel, prompt actually returns
this value to get name.
Now when a function returns or is done executing, it's popped off the stack, which means it's removed
from the stack, it's removed from that short term memory because it's done.
Now important, that does not mean that the function definition is removed from the heap, from that long
term stack just as current execution which of course also involves resources that need to be allocated
and data that needs to be managed for this function execution.
That data, this execution context therefore is removed from the stack. Now in get name, we therefore
get that result from this prompt function call,
now what do we do with it?
Well we also return that,
so get name returns the data to the greet function. As a result, get name also gets popped off of the
stack, whenever a function returns a value or simply is done with all its steps, it's removed from the
stack, it's popped off the stack, the Javascript engine does that for us. Now after being popped off,
so get name was popped off,
we're in greet. Now greet contines running, we don't have a return statement in there but once the function
executed its last line
that's part of the function, it implicitly returns,
so it automatically returns,
so therefore once this is done, greet is also popped off the stack
which leaves us with the main script, with the script itself which you could imagine as being wrapped
by a big anonymous function and now in this script, clearly once we're done with greet, there is no other
step left, right, there is nothing after greet, no other steps left
so we're done with this overall script execution. So therefore, we also pop this off,
that means we're done with everything that needs to be executed at the moment. We can also see that
in the browser, of course we see the result in the console
but if you go to sources and then to your script file there, we worked with that earlier in the debugging
section,
you can actually place a breakpoint and place one here inside of get name by clicking on this line
number 2 in my case. If you now reload the page, it stops execution at this point of time
and if you now expand this, you actually see the call stack here.
This is exactly the stack I was talking about, not the full stack because these stack memory itself does
actually not just manage function calls but also short living values stored in variables
but it shows us the order in which the functions are executed and how they are managed as a stack
and this is just the stack I was just referring to
and here you see get name before you see greet and then you see this anonymous thing at the bottom.
Now get name is about to call prompt and we can actually see that by stepping into the next function
call which opens this prompt here and there if I enter Max and hit
OK, well we're back to get name, unfortunately here it never shows prompt being called but prompt would
be pushed on top of the stack as well
and now if I continue here and I step out of the current function call for example, we're back in greet,
therefore get name was popped off the stack.
If I step out of this function call,
well then we're back to anonymous because greet was popped off the stack
and if I now resume script execution, eventually the call stack is empty. So that is how this in the
end works.
This is how Javascript manages the data and the execution context, the order of execution
and this is how it therefore works under the hood.
Now you might remember from the first course section that there I mentioned that Javascript is single
threaded. Now without getting too technical,
that basically means that Javascript can only do one thing at a time.
That's exactly what happened here,
it called one function at a time and the other functions waited for the response of that function, just
as you saw it in that stack.
So the stack and this idea of managing our function calls and the flow of the script therefore in such
a stack, that basically ensures that this single threading thing works and that the order of execution
is ensured and that every function basically knows to which function it relates.
Now there is one other important concept which is actually not part of the Javascript engine but of
modern browsers, like Google Chrome browser
but also of other browsers and that's a thing called the event loop.
This will actually help us with asynchronous code which we haven't really learned too much about yet,
it helps us with things like event listeners, these click listeners which we added to buttons. The current
picture which you have here, where we have this stack which does stuff and which eventually is empty
kind of implies that a script always has a certain point of time where it's just done with everything,
just like this script actually is, it's done after line 10 executed but that's not necessarily always
the case for all scripts.
What about a script like this and you'll find this setup attached as well, it's this index.html
file which has a bit more content and it has two buttons in this app.js file.
Let's not worry too much about what's happening here,
I'll come back to this script and about an issue which it actually has later in this module
but the main thing which is important to us right now is that here, we're actually adding event listeners.
We're adding event listeners here to buttons and that of course therefore means that if we would actually
execute this and remove this breakpoint here and instead I set a new one in app.js and I set one here
at the end, at line 14 when we register this event listener and now I reload,
well then of course execution pauses and we have our call stack down there.
Right now, I'm not pausing inside of a function, so the anonymous wrapping function is the only thing on
there
and if I resume, the call stack is empty here as well.
Now this would imply that this script is not able to do anything ever again and still if we go to the
console and you enter something here in the input, click add a listener and then click me, you see this
actually still does something,
this output here is coming from our script from line 7.
So this script is still alive, even though we're at the end of it and even though our call stack
is empty.
So that can be confusing, why is that happening?
Well that's exactly what that event loop is about.
We'll dive into that in way more detail later once we learned more, we'll learn something at all about
asynchronous code in Javascript and what this is and what the opposite is,
for now you can just keep in mind that there is something else in the browser, not in the Javascript engine,
the engine is really just that heap stack thing
but in the browser which communicates with the engine of course which is this event loop and in the
end, you can imagine these click listeners as information being passed to the browser,
so therefore the Javascript engine does not care at all about these ongoing listeners,
the browser manages them and the browser basically pings the Javascript engine you could say whenever
it has a new event being fired by the listeners set up by the Javascript code.
So the browser kind of manages these listeners and whenever such a listener triggers, whenever a button
is clicked which of course is part of the web page rendered by the browser, so the browser knows when
that happens, whenever that happens, it basically pushes that information to your script
you could say and it does so with the help of that event loop which is there to control that this pushed
event does not interrupt with your ongoing script which might be running but instead is executed in
order
once your call stack is empty
but again we'll have a detailed look at this event loop thing in a later module after we learned about
asynchronous code. The Javascript engine itself is this heap and stack thing here.